Add "TRONE Indication" strawman. (#23)
ietf-wg-scone/scone: draft-thoji-scone-trone-protocol.md

transport parameters, and frame types registries established in {{Sections 22.2,
22.3, and 22.4 of QUIC}}.

# TRONE Indication {#trone-indication}

QUIC endpoints can signal potential support for TRONE before the completion of

> the QUIC handshake by attaching a TRONE indication packet after a QUIC Initial
> packet in the first UDP datagram. The TRONE indication provides an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the QUIC handshake by attaching a TRONE indication packet after the last QUIC long header
packet in the first UDP datagram. The TRONE indication provides an
```

Trone is designed to be QUIC-version-neutral, so it is better to avoid referring to concepts specific to QUIC v1. Also, even in v1, the first datagram that an endpoint sends might contain an Initial and a Handshake (consider servers).

opportunistic signal to network elements that the client might support TRONE.
Network elements can use this as an early hint, but must await confirmation of

> TRONE support by observing a full TRONE packet after the handshake completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TRONE support by observing a full TRONE packet after the handshake completes.

When sending QUIC short header packets in the first flight, endpoints SHOULD send them
separately from the first datagram carrying the TRONE indication packet, to avoid
receivers incapable of decoding TRONE packets from dropping the short header packet.
```

## TRONE Indication Packet

A TRONE indication packet has a format with fully reversed field order compared
to TRONE packets to facilitate detection by parsing from the end of the packet.

{{fig-trone-indication-packet}} shows the format of the TRONE indication packet:

~~~ artwork
TRONE Indication Packet {
  Source Connection ID (0..2040),
  Source Connection ID Length (8),
  Destination Connection ID (0..2040),
  Destination Connection ID Length (8),
  Version (32) = 0xTRONE1 or 0xTRONE2,

>   Rate Signal (6) = 0x3F,

Reviewer: I think there is a question around what TRONE indication packets signal.

IIRC, TRONE is unidirectional.

Assuming the use of a TRONE indication packet signal that the sender is capable of _receiving_ TRONE packets, If so, I do not think need a rate signal here (and separately, I think we can use a different version number for indication packets).

Author: Agreed, I think all the fields here are likely excessive, but kept them in for now so we can discuss further. A new version is probably fine in terms of avoiding false positives.

A TRONE indication packet has a format with fully reversed field order compared
to TRONE packets to facilitate detection by parsing from the end of the packet.

{{fig-trone-indication-packet}} shows the format of the TRONE indication packet:

~~~ artwork
TRONE Indication Packet {
  Source Connection ID (0..2040),
  Source Connection ID Length (8),
  Destination Connection ID (0..2040),
  Destination Connection ID Length (8),
  Version (32) = 0xTRONE1 or 0xTRONE2,
  Rate Signal (6) = 0x3F,
  Reserved (1),
  Header Form (1) = 1
}
~~~
{: #fig-trone-indication-packet title="TRONE Indication Packet Format"}

A TRONE indication packet is attached directly after a QUIC Initial packet in
the first UDP datagram. The Rate Signal field MUST be set to 0x3F (63) when
sent as a TRONE indication packet.

## Sending TRONE Indication

A QUIC endpoint that supports TRONE MAY attach a TRONE indication packet after
a QUIC Initial packet in the first UDP datagram. This is an opportunistic
signal that is not guaranteed to be processed by the receiver, as the receiver
has not yet confirmed its willingness to receive TRONE packets.

When attaching a TRONE indication, the endpoint SHOULD:

> * Place it immediately after the QUIC Initial packet in the datagram

Reviewer 2: Is this consistent with a Datagram that has a coalesced 0RTT packet, or Mozilla-like zero padding? The parsing rules indicate this should be the very last thing.

2. Check if the datagram length exceeds the minimum expected size of a QUIC
   Initial packet
3. Examine the last byte of the datagram to see if it has the Header Form bit
   set to 1
4. If set, read backward to verify the Version field matches 0xTRONE1 or
   0xTRONE2
5. Optionally read the Connection ID fields and match them to the QUIC packet.

The following pseudocode shows how a network element might detect a TRONE
indication:

~~~ pseudocode
is_quic = is_quic_datagram(datagram)
if is_quic and datagram_length > MIN_INITIAL_SIZE:
  last_byte = datagram[datagram_length - 1]

  if (last_byte & 0x80) == 0x80:
    version_start = datagram_length - 8
    version_end = datagram_length - 4
    potential_version = datagram[version_start:version_end]

    if potential_version == TRONE1_VERSION or potential_version == TRONE2_VERSION:
      note_potential_trone_support(flow_tuple)
~~~

This approach allows network elements to detect TRONE support without needing
to parse the full QUIC Initial packet structure or perform deep packet
inspection of the TLS handshake.

Network elements that observe TRONE indication packets MAY:

> * Note the UDP 4-tuple for potential future TRONE handling

Reviewer 2: It would be helpful for understanding to elaborate more on the implications of these actions? An operator can do whatever it wants, but it is not clear to me what actions we expect them to take in terms of treatment of the flow (besides not trying to extract the SNI)

> * Note the UDP 4-tuple for potential future TRONE handling

Reviewer 3: Can you elaborate on how the network elements reacts to this indication? The network element needs to wait for a TRONE signal in the server-to-client direction in order to confirm that the flow supports TRONE. Why is this better than just having the network element look at the first packet in the server-to-client direction of each 5-tuple?
